>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING, I'M
JUDY WOODRUFF.
REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS BLOCKED
PASSAGE BY RAIL, MARCH ON FOOT
TOWARDS WESTERN EUROPE.
A CONTINENT SPLIT OVER OPENING
DOORS AND CLOSING THE BORDERS.
>> I WOULD SAY, IN THE LONG RUN,
WE CANNOT HAVE THE SITUATION
WITH SWEDEN.
AND GERMANY TAKES HALF OF THE
RESPONSIBILITY.
ALL COUNTRIES HAVE TO DO THEIR
FAIR SHARE.
>> Woodruff: THEN, THE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE FALLS AGAIN.
WILL JOB GAINS DURING SUMMER
DRIVE THE FEDERAL RESERVE TO
RAISE INTEREST RATES?
PLUS, SENATORS TAKE SIDES OVER
THE IRAN NUCLEAR DEAL.
HILLARY CLINTON ANSWERS
QUESTIONS ABOUT USING PRIVATE
EMAIL, AND JOE BIDEN HESITATES
ON A 2016 RUN.
MARK SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON
ARE HERE, TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
ALL THAT AND MORE ON TONIGHT'S
PBS NEWSHOUR.
OUT ON THE U.S. ECONOMY TODAY
POINTED IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
ON THE ONE HAND, JOB CREATION IN
AUGUST WAS THE SLOWEST IT'S BEEN
IN FIVE MONTHS.
THE LABOR DEPARTMENT REPORTED
EMPLOYERS ADDED A NET OF 173,000
WORKERS.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE, BASED ON A
SEPARATE SURVEY, FELL TO ITS
BEST PLACE SINCE EARLY 2008,
5.1%.
WE'LL GET SOME REACTION AND
ANALYSIS, LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
THE REACTION ON WALL STREET WAS
DECIDEDLY NEGATIVE.
INVESTORS WORRIED THE LACKLUSTER
JOB GROWTH WON'T STOP THE
FEDERAL RESERVE FROM RAISING
INTEREST RATES.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST MORE THAN 270 POINTS TO
CLOSE NEAR 16,100.
THE NASDAQ FELL NEARLY 50
POINTS, AND THE S&P 500 DROPPED
30.
FOR THE WEEK, ALL THREE INDEXES
WERE DOWN THREE PERCENT OR MORE.
TO EUROPE'S REFUGEE AND MIGRANT
CRISIS: CROWDS OF SYRIANS AND
OTHERS BEGAN STREAMING OUT OF
BUDAPEST, HUNGARY, TODAY; WITH
ALL THEIR BELONGINGS, DETERMINED
TO MAKE IT TO GERMANY.
HUNDREDS MORE STRUGGLED TO GET
PAST AUTHORITIES IN OTHER PARTS
OF THE COUNTRY.
JAMES MATES OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS REPORTS FROM
BUDAPEST.
>> Reporter: IT IS NOT QUITE ON
A BIBLICAL SCALE, BUT AN EXODUS
IT CERTAINLY IS.
AT LEAST 2,000, MAYBE MORE, OF
THE REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS WHO'VE
BEEN TRAPPED AT A RAILWAY
STATION IN BUDAPEST, NOW
DECIDING TO WALK THE HUNDREDS OF
MILES TO GERMANY AND WHAT THEY
SEE AS THE PROMISED LAND.
CHILDREN TOO WERE SET ON THE
ROAD, THE BLAZING SUN AND
TRAFFIC ON THE MAJOR MOTORWAY
OUT OF THE CITY NO DETERRENT.
IT IS HARD TO IMAGINE THIS
REFUGEE COULD GOT MUCH SADDER
AND STILL MORE PATHETIC.
THEY'VE CLEARLY SET OUT ON A
HOPELESS QUEST.
THE AUSTRIAN BORDER IS MUCH TOO
FAR TO WALK.
YET THE FACT THEY'VE DONE THIS
AT ALL REFLECTS THEIR
DESPERATION BEING STUCK IN
BUDAPEST.
INFIRMITY WAS NO BARRIER.
THERE IS CLEARLY NO CHANCE OF
MANY OF THESE PEOPLE MAKING IT
MORE THAN A FEW MORE MILES.
BUT THEY KNOW THAT WHAT THEY ARE
DOING WILL GET ATTENTION AND
ANYTHING MUST BE BETTER THAN
SITTING IN SQUALOR WAITING FOR A
TRAIN THAT MAY NEVER COME.
IS THIS YOUR WAY OF SHAMING
EUROPE INTO HELPING YOU?
>> YES, THAT IS WHAT WE WANT.
>> Reporter: IT'S HUNDREDS OF
MILES TO THE BORDER.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
WALK THAT FAR.
>> OK.
WE MAKE OUR WAY TO GERMANY.
THIS IS HISTORY.
OUR CHILDREN WILL KNOW
EVERYTHING.
A FREIGHT TRAIN IS BEING MOVED
IN TO BLOCK THE VIEW OF CAMERAS,
MANY OF THOSE ON BOARD HAVE NOW
GIVEN UP AND ARE BEING TAKEN TO
WAITING BUSES, THOUGH OTHER ARE
BELIEVED TO HAVE FLED DOWN THE
TRACKS.
BUT IT'S NOT CLEAR THERE IS ANY
POINT IN TAKING PEOPLE TO CAMPS
OR RECEPTION CENTERS.
WE WATCHED A BUSLOAD BEING
BROUGHT INTO THE CENTER AT
BISCKE AND THEY WERE
FINGERPRINTED, BUT BARELY TEN
MINUTES LATER WERE SIMPLY
JUMPING OVER THE FENCE AND
WALKING AWAY.
NO ONE APPEARED TO BE TRYING TO
STOP THEM.
THERE WAS A DIFFERENT ATTITUDE
ON DISPLAY AT A CAMP IN THE FAR
SOUTH OF HUNGARY ON THE SERBIAN
BORDER.
NEWS FROM BUDAPEST IS ENFLAMING
OPINION EVERYWHE ANDRE HERE AT
ROSHKE THERE WAS AN ATTEMPT TO
BREAK DOWN THE FENCE.
POLICE MOVED IN USING LIBERAL
AMOUNTS OF TEAR GAS TO TRY AND
RESTORE ORDER.
THE SITUATION IS DEGENERATING BY
THEAY. D
THERE ARE SIMPLY TOO MANY PEOPLE
ON THE MOVE FOR THE HUNGARIANS
TO KEEP THEM UNDER CONTROL.
THE HUNGARIAN GOVERNMENT
ANNOUNCED IT WILL SEND 100 BUSES
TO TAKE THE CROWDS TO THE
AUSTRIAN BORDER OF.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN SYRIA, TWO
SMALL BOYS AND THEIR MOTHER WERE
BURIED AFT THEERY DROWNED TRYING
TO GET TO GREECE.
AN IMAGE OF ONE OF THE CHILDREN
WASHED UP ON A BEACH, 3-YEAR-OLD
AYLAN KURDI, HAS GALVANIZED A
GLOBAL WAVE OF SYMPATHY.
THE BURIAL WAS IN THE FAMILY'S
HOME TOWN OF KOBANI, NEAR THE
BORDER WITH TURKEY.
THE FATHER SAID HE WANTS TO STAY
NEAR THEM AND WON'T TRY TO GET
BACK TO EUROPE.
IN YEMEN, 45 SOLDIERS FROM THE
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES AND BAHRAIN
WERE KILLED TODAY, FIGHTING
SHIITE REBELS.
OFFICIALS SAID A MISSILE STRUCK
A WEAPONS DEPOT NEAR THEIR POST,
ABOUT 75 MILES EAST OF SANAA,
THE CAPITAL CITY.
THE ATTACK WAS THE DEADLIEST YET
ON THE GULF ARAB COALITION.
IT'S BEING LED BY SAUDI ARABIA,
IN A KIND OF PROXY WAR WITH
IRAN.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WELCOMED SAUDI
KING SALMAN FOR HIS FIRST VISIT
TO THE WHITE HOUSE TODAY.
THE PRESIDENT REAFFIRMED U.S.
SUPPORT FOR STABILIZING YEMEN,
WHILE ACKNOWLEDGING THE COSTS IN
HUMAN LIVES AND SUFFERING.
>> WE SHARE CONCERNS ABOUT YEMEN
AND THE NEED TO RESTORE A
FUNCTIONING GOVERNMENT THAT IS
INCLUSIVE AND THAT CAN RELIEVE
THE HUMANITARIAN SITUATION
THERE.
>> Woodruff: MR. OBAMA ALSO
SOUGHT AGAIN TO REASSURE THE
SAUDI KING ABOUT THE NUCLEAR
DEAL WITH IRAN.
THE PRESIDENT SECURED AT
SENATOR'S SUPPORT FROM COLORADO
DEMOCRAT MICHAEL BENNETT.
38 U.S. SENATORS NOW FAVOR THE
AGREEMENT, THREE SHORT OF WHAT'S
NEEDED TO BLOCK A REPUBLICAN
RESOLUTION DISAPPROVING THE
DEAL.
SAME-SEX COUPLES IN ROWAN
COUNTY, KENTUCKY BEGAN RECEIVING
MARRIAGE LICENSES TODAY.
DEPUTY COUNTY CLERKS ISSUED THE
DOCUMENTS, WHILE THEIR BOSS, KIM
DAVIS, REMAINED IN JAIL FOR
REFUSING TO DO SO.
THE FIRST COUPLE AT THE
COURTHOUSE GOT THEIR LICENSE IN
A CRUSH OF NEWS CAMERAS.
THEN, THEY CELEBRATED OUTSIDE,
AS SUPPORTERS CHEERED AND
PROTESTERS BOOED.
>> WHAT DOES THIS MEAN FOR SAME-
SEX RIGHTS IN THIS COUNTRY?
>> THIS MEANS, AT LEAST IN THIS
AREA, CIVIL RIGHTS ARE CIVIL
RIGHTS, AND THEY'RE NOT SUBJECT
TO BELIEF.
>> Woodruff: LATER, DAVIS'
LAWYER SAID THE LICENSES ISSUED
AND HE SAID HE'LL APPEAL A
FEDERAL JUDGE'S ORDER THAT PUT
HER BEHIND BARS FOR CONTEMPT OF
COURT.
AND REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE MIKE HUCKABEE SAID HE
PLANS TO VISIT THE JAIL NEXT
WEEK TO MEET WITH DAVIS.
BUT G.O.P. FRONTRUNNER DONALD
TRUMP, CITING THE SUPREME COURT,
SAID SAME SEX MARRIAGE IS NOW
THE LAW OF THE LAND, AND, IN HIS
WORDS, "YOU HAVE TO GO WITH IT."
AND, A TEACHER FROM NEW YORK
CITY WAS ARRESTED EARLY TODAY
FOR ALLEGEDLY CRASHING A DRONE
AT THE U.S. OPEN TENNIS
TOURNAMENT.
THE DRONE BUZZED OVER THE
PLAYERS IN LOUIS ARMSTRONG
STADIUM LAST NIGHT, BEFORE
LANDING IN AN EMPTY SECTION OF
SEATS.
THE POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
INVESTIGATED AND THE MATCH WAS
ALLOWED TO CONTINUE.
THE 26-YEAR OLD TEACHER FACES A
CHARGE OF RECKLESS ENDANGERMENT,
AMONG OTHERS.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
HOW JOBS ADDED TO THE ECONOMY
MAY FACTOR INTO AN INTEREST RATE
HIKE.
GUATEMALA'S PRESIDENT RESIGNS
AND GOES TO JAIL ON CHARGES OF
CORRUPTION.
AND MUCH MORE.
>> Woodruff: AS THE FEDERAL
RESERVE GETS SET TO MAKE A
DECISION IN A FEW WEEKS ABOUT
WHETHER TO RAISE INTEREST RATES,
TODAY'S MONTHLY U.S. JOBS REPORT
ADDED YET MORE MIXED SIGNALS.
THE NUMBER OF NEW JOBS WAS QUITE
MODEST AND BELOW EXPECTATIONS.
YET IT COMES AMID SOME BETTER
DATA, AND JOB GROWTH OVER THE
SUMMER WAS STEADY OVERALL.
HARI SREENIVASAN IN OUR NEW YORK
STUDIO GETS SOME ANALYSIS.
>> Sreenivasan: BETWEEN THE
LATEST JOBS NUMBERS, THE
VOLATILITY OF THE MARKETS AND
WORRIES OVER SLUGGISH WAGE
GROWTH, THERE ARE QUESTIONS OVER
JUST HOW STRONG, OR NOT, THE
ECONOMY IS PERFORMING, AND WHAT
IT MEANS FOR MOST HOUSEHOLDS.
DIANE SWONK STUDIES THE JOBS
DATA AND JOINS ME NOW.
SHE'S WITH MESIROW FINANCIAL IN
CHICAGO.
THIS IS ONLY ONE PIECE OF DATA
HEADING INTO NEXT WEEK'S FED
MEETING BUT IT'S THE LAST PIECE
OF DATA AND, FRANKLY, LOOKING AT
IT, IT MAYBE WOULD HAVE BEEN
DIFFERENT THREE WEEKS AGO BEFORE
ALL OF THIS CHURN IN THE MARKET.
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, AND THE FED
IS DATA DEPENDENT SO EVERY PIECE
GETS MINCED TO THE NINTH DEGREE
AND THIS DATA IS NOTORIOUSLY
BAD.
THE FIRST TIME THEY ANNOUNCE IT,
THEY DON'T GET THE FULL COUNT
AND TEND TO UNDERESTIMATE QUITE
A BIT.
WE KNEW IT WAS GOING TO COME IN
LOW AND LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE THE
BIAS AGAIN.
FOR MANY ON THE THE FED, THEY
SAY IT'S ENOUGH.
THEY SAY THE LABOR MARKET IS
DOING AS GOOD AS IT CAN DO.
IT'S BETTER THAN IT WAS, BUT
THIS IS NOT GOOD ENOUGH FOR A
LOT OF PEOPLE.
BUT THE UNCERTAINTY IS IT'S NOT
JUST THIS DATA BUT WHAT ARE WE
DOING GOING FORWARD, SO ALL THIS
MARKET VOLATILITY, CONCERNS
ABOUT GROWTH ABROAD, HOW THAT
WILL AFFECT US, THERE IS NO SUCH
THINGS AS LAS VEGAS IN THE
ECONOMY ANYMORE, IT GOES
EVERYWHERE.
SO WE WORRY WHEN THINGS ABROAD
GOES WRONG BECAUSE IT CAN HIT US
ON OUR SHORES.
THE UNCERTAINTY, IT'S NOT JUST
TODAY'S DATA, THE FED HAVE TO
CONSIDER WHAT ARE THE RISK GOING
FORWARD, THEY'RE CLEARLY MORE TO
THE DOWN SIDE THAN A MONTH AGO.
HOW MUCH?
THAT'S WHY WE'RE SPLITTING HAIRS
OVER DECIDING IS IT GOING TO GO
OR NOT GO, A FEW WEEKS AWAY, THE
FIRST RATE HIKE IN NEARLYDECADE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BALANCE
ACT BETWEEN SHAKING THE
CONFIDENCE OUT OF SOME MARKETS
AND ON THE OTHER HAND
OVERHEATING THE ECONOMY?
>> I THINK THERE IS A LOT OF
HEATED DEBATE ABOUT A PRETTY
TEPID ECONOMY AND THE FEDS GOAL
IS NOT TO TAKE THE PUNCH BOWL
AWAY FROM THE ECONOMY BUT PUT A
THREE-DRINK LIMIT.
THEY'D STILL LIKE TO GET US
DANCING ON THE FLOOR, MORE
PEOPLE OUT THERE A LITTLE BIT.
SO I THINK THAT'S ALSO IMPORTANT
FOR PEOPLE TO REMEMBER.
WHEN HISTORY BOOKS ARE WRITTEN,
IT WON'T BE WHEN THE FED MADE
THE FIRST RATE HIKE AND HOW BIG
BECAUSE WE KNOW IT WILL BE
SMALL, IT COULD BE IN SEPTEMBER,
DECEMBER, MARCH.
WHAT'S GOING TO MAKE THE
DIFFERENCE IS HOW FAST THE FEDS
RAISE RATES THEREAFTER.
THAT'S A GLACIAL PACE.
THAT'S IMPORTANT BECAUSE
GLACIERS SNEAK UP BUT THEY WON'T
DO ANYTHING TO QUELL THE ECONOMY
REAL QUICKLY.
>> Sreenivasan: 5.1% IS VERY
CLOSE TO WHAT COMILSES CALL FULL
EMPLOYMENT.
>> YEAH, THAT 5.1 DPURNTS FEEL
LIKE THE PAST.
WE DON'T HAVE THE WAGES
ACCELERATING.
WAGES ARE STILL VERY STAGNANT
OUT THERE.
YOU SHOULD BE SEEING MORE WAGE
GROWTH.
WAGE GROWTH IS AN AFTERAFFECT OF
A TIGHTER LABOR MARKET, BUT I
LOOK AROUND AND, GOSH, I
REMEMBER MUCH BETTER LABOR
MARKETS THAN THIS.
THIS DOESN'T HAVE THE SAME FEEL
AND TASTE OF A LABOR MARKET THAT
REALLY IS OVERHEATING.
SO I THINK THERE IS GOING TO BE
A LOT OF DATA AND DATA POINTS
AND WHAT'S INTERESTING IS WE'RE
CAUGHT IN THE WEEDS.
STEPPING BACK, WE'LL GET TO HAVE
ALL PICTURE, THE FED IS HAVING A
HEATED DEBATE ABOUT A STILL
TEPID ECONOMY BUT MAY BE AS GOOD
AS THEY CAN DO FOR IT AND
APPROPRIATE TO RAISE RATES,
SPLITTING HAIRS, BUT STILL NOT A
GREAT ECONOMY.
THIS ECONOMY STILL NEEDS
CATCH-UP TO IT AND THE FED
UNDERSTANDS IT VERY WELL, THERE
IS NOT MUCH THEY CAN DO.
IF THEY WERE A MAGICIAN THEY
WOULD HAVE WAVED THE MAGIC WAND
AND LIFTED US OUT OF THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: DIANE SWONK,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN NOW TO A
MAJOR SHAKE-UP IN THE CENTRAL
AMERICAN NATION OF GUATEMALA.
ON THURSDAY MORNING, PRESIDENT
OTTO PEREZ MOLINA WAS FORCED TO
RESIGN.
BY THURSDAY AFTERNOON HE WAS IN
COURT TO FACE CHARGES, AND HE
SPENT THE NIGHT IN JAIL.
HE'S ACCUSED OF TAKING PART IN A
MULTI-MILLION DOLLAR BRIBERY
OPERATION.
AS THE ALLEGATIONS WERE REVEALED
OVER THE SUMMER, TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF GUATEMALANS TOOK TO
THE STREETS, DEMANDING
ACCOUNTABILITY.
FOR MORE ON THESE ALLEGATIONS
AND WHAT IT MEANS FOR THAT
COUNTRY, I'M JOINED NOW BY
ADRIANA BELTRAN, A GUATAMALA
EXPERT AT THE WASHINGTON OFFICE
ON LATIN AMERICA, A RESEARCH
GROUP THAT ADVOCATES FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS.
WELCOME TO THE "NewsHour".
>> THANK YOU, JUDY, FOR INVITING
ME.
>> Woodruff: SO TELL US, WHAT
ARE ALL THESE CORRUPTION CHARGES
ABOUT?
WHAT DO THEY INVOLVE?
>> THAT'S IN APRIL.
THE GUATEMALAN PROSECUTORS
OFFICE AND COMMISSION AGAINST
IMPUGN ANY GUATEMALA UNEARTHED A
MASSIVE CORRUPTION SCANDAL
WITHIN THE TAX AUTHORITY OFFICE.
IT IMPLICATED A NUMBER OF
HIGH-LEVEL OFFICIALS WHO
ESSENTIALLY SET UP A SCHEME
WHERE THEY WERE ACCEPTING
MASSIVE BRIBES FOR IMPORTERS TO
BE ABLE TO PAY LOWER TAXES,
THEREBY DEFYING THE STATE OF
MILLIONS AND MILLIONS OF
REVENUE.
>> Woodruff: AND THIS HAS BEEN
UNFOLDING OVER THE YEAR.
EARLIER THIS YEAR THE
VICE PRESIDENT STEPPED DOWN.
>> DUE TO THESE CHARGES, THE
VICE PRESIDENT WAS FORCED TO
RESIGN IN MAY IN.
AUGUST, FOLLOWING MORE
INVESTIGATIONS CARRIED OUT BY
THE PROSECUTORS' OFFICE AND THE
S.E.C., THEY ANNOUNCED THEY HAD
SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE TO ALLEGE
BOTH FORMER VICE PRESIDENT AND
NOW THE FORMER PRESIDENT WERE
INVOLVED IN THIS CASE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT LED TO HIS
ACTUALLY LEAVING OFFICE?
>> SINCE THE APRIL SCANDAL CAME
OUT, THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS OF
GUATEMALANS HAD BEEN PROTESTING
ON THE STREETS, DEMANDING END TO
CORRUPTION, AND TO IMPUNITY AND
TRANSFORMATION TO HAVE THE
POLITICAL SYSTEM.
IT HAS BEEN UNPRECEDENTED IN
GUATEMALA TO SEE THE NUMBER OF
PEOPLE WHO HAVE TAKEN TO THE
STREETS IN A VERY PEACEFUL WAY,
BUT BECAUSE IT HAS BROUGHT
TOGETHER GUATEMALANS FROM
DIFFERENT SECTORS OF OFF COME
TOGETHER FOR A COMMON CAUSE.
>> Woodruff: AND THE
GOVERNMENT WASN'T PUSHING BACK
ON THESE DEMONSTRATIONS?
>> NOT AT ALL.
THEY HAVE BEEN VERY PEACEFUL.
THEY HAVE BEEN HAPPENING FOR 19
WEEKS SINCE APRIL.
>> Woodruff: GA GUATEMALA HAS A
HISTORY OF CORRUPTION AND
REPRESSION.
WHAT CAUSED THE PEOPLE TO RISE
UP THIS TIME?
>> I THINK THERE ARE THREE
TAKEAWAYS.
ONE, I THINK THE COURAGEOUS
EFFORTS OF THE PUBLIC
PROSECUTOR, OF A NUMBER OF
PROSECUTORS AND JUDGES THAT HAVE
SHOWN THAT THE JUSTICE SYSTEM
CAN BE MADE TO WORK IN A COUNTRY
WHERE, BEFORE, YOU KNOW, THEY
ALWAYS FACED THE REPERCUSSIONS
AND WERE AT SEVERE RISK FOR
TAKING A STAND.
THE WORK OF THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMISSION AGAINST IMPUNITY OF
THE S.E.C. HAS ALWAYS BEEN
UP THE CAPABILITIES OF THE
INSTITUTIONS AND THAT, YOU KNOW,
ALLOWED OR PROVOKED THE PEOPLE
TO TAKE TO THE STREETS IN
MASSIVE NUMBERS.
>> Woodruff: SO NOW, THE
FORMER PRESIDENT IS IN JAIL.
DOES THIS FEEL LIKE A REAL
TURNING POINT, LIKE THINGS WILL
CHANGE AFTER THIS?
>> I DO.
TO ME, THIS IS AN HISTORIC
MOMENT FOR GUATEMALA BUT ALSO
ANANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS IN THE
REGION.
THIS IS NOT THE GUATEMALA WE
KNEW BEFORE APRIL.
GOT MALLENS KNOW THEY CAN MAKE A
DIFFERENCE AND STARTED NEW
OPENINGS FOR THEIR COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: THE
VICE PRESIDENT WHO'S TAKEN OVER,
IS HE DIFFERENT?
>> YOU HAVE AN INTERIM
GOVERNMENT AND THE DIFFERENT
SECTORS ARE CONTINUING TO WORK
TOGETHER.
THEY'RE RIGHT NOW TRYING TO
DEFINE A COMMON ANTI-CORRUPTION
AGENDA THEY CAN PUSH FORWARD IN
THE NEXT SEVERAL MONTHS.
GUATEMALAN POLITICIANS AND
POLICYMAKERS KNOW THE POPULATION
IS WATCHING AND WILL MOLD THEM
ACCOUNTABLE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT'S YOUR SENSE
ABOUT THE FUTURE?
>> I'M HOPEFUL.
I THINK THIS IS A TREMENDOUS
TRIUMPH OF HOPE AND A
DEMONSTRATION THAT CHANGE CAN
HAPPEN, THAT JUSTICE AND THE
RULE OF LAW CAN PREVAIL TO
PEACEFUL NEEDS.
>> Woodruff: YOU SAID A MINUTE
AGO A REGIONAL CHANGE.
DO YOU SEE THIS HAVING AN EFFECT
ANYWHERE ELSE IN CENTRA CENTRAL
AMERICA?
>> I'M HOPING WHAT WE CAN TAKE
AWAY FROM GUATEMALA AND THESE
EVENTS IS WE CAN COMBAT
CORRUPTION THROUGH PEACEFUL
DEMONSTRATION, THROUGH THE
LEADERSHIP OF COURAGEOUS PEOPLE
AND THE SUPPORT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
>> Woodruff: ADRIANA BELTRAN,
WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US,
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR:
MARK SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON
ANALYZE THE WEEK'S NEWS.
AND, WILL MACHINES HELP HUMANS
OR REPLACE THEM?
FINDING PEACE AS ROBOTS
INTEGRATE INTO THE MODERN WORLD.
A WEEK AWAY FROM AN EMERGENCY
SUMMIT TO DISCUSS THE REFUGEE
CRISIS, THE COUNTRIES OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION REMAIN DEEPLY
DIVIDED OVER HOW TO HANDLE IT.
SWEDEN, THE NATION WHICH HAS
TAKEN THE MOST REFUGEES IN
RELATION TO ITS POPULATION SIZE,
IS CALLING FOR EVERY E.U. NATION
TO TAKE ITS FAIR SHARE AND TO BE
MORE CIVILIZED.
BUT ITS NEIGHBOR DENMARK HAS
JUST INTRODUCED NEW WELFARE
BENEFIT RESTRICTIONS AIMED AT
DISCOURAGING ASYLUM SEEKERS FROM
HEADING THERE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM
BRABANT REPORTS ON THE NORTH-
SOUTH DIVIDE IN SCANDINAVIA.
HE BEGINS IN SOUTHERN SWEDEN.
>> Reporter: JOURNEY'S END.
SYRIANS KHALED AL HABASH, IN THE
BLUE SHIRT, AND NOURI SHKAIS ARE
RELISHING THEIR NEW
SANCTUARY.
BUT HABASH IS MISSING HIS
CHILDREN.
HE DIDN'T DARE ENTRUST THEM TO
THE MEDITERRANEAN.
HE HOPES SWEDEN WILL REUNITE
THEM SAFELY.
THE RECEPTION CENTER IN A
COUNTRY THAT REGARDS ITSELF AS
THE WORLD'S CONSCIENCE. HABASH
CAN'T COMPREHEND HOW SOME
EUROPEANS ARE HOSTILE TOWARDS
REFUGEES.
>> WE ARE NOT COMING HERE FOR
TOURISM.
WE ARE COMING FROM WAR.
AND I THINK WHO DO LIKE THAT ARE
HOSTILE TO REFUGEES.
THEY MUST GO TO SYRIA AND SEE
WHAT HAPPENS IN SYRIA.
MY CHILDREN NOW, UNDER THE
BOMBS.
THEY DON'T HAVE WATER FOR ONE
>> Reporter: NOURI SHKAIS FLED
LATAKIA, THE HOMETOWN OF SYRIA'S
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL ASSAD TO
AVOID BEING CONSCRIPTED INTO THE
ARMY.
THE DESTINATION WAS AN EASY
CHOICE.
>> IN SWEDEN, YOU CAN GET A
RESIDENCE PERMIT FOR A LONG
TIME.
AND YOU CAN GET CITIZENSHIP
AFTER FOUR YEARS.
NOT LIKE DANISH.
>> Reporter: IT WASN'T JUST WAR
THAT COMPELLED SAXOPHONIST
MOHAMMED DIAB TO SEEK REFUGEE IN
SWEDEN.
IN SYRIA, HIS HOMOSEXUALITY
COULD MEAN TORTURE AND A BRUTAL
DEATH.
HE'S REHEARSING IN COPENHAGEN
WITH HIS OLD DAMASCUS BAND MATE
NOUR MOURA, WHO WAS GRANTED
ASYLUM IN DENMARK.
THEY WANT TO RELAUNCH THEIR
CAREERS IN EUROPE.
AND WHILE THEY WAIT, THEY HAVE
THE CUSHION OF WELFARE BENEFITS.
BUT FROM THIS WEEK, MOURA THE
GUITARIST, WILL BE THE POORER OF
THE PAIR.
HIS BENEFITS WILL BE CUT BY 45%.
>> Reporter: THE CENTER RIGHT
MINORITY GOVERNMENT INTRODUCED
THE LAW TO DISSUADE REFUGEES AND
ECONOMIC MIGRANTS FROM HEADING
TO DENMARK.
IT HAS THE FULL SUPPORT OF THE
DANISH PEOPLE'S PARTY, WHICH
CAME IN SECOND IN JUNE'S GENERAL
ELECTION.
MARTIN HENRIKSEN IS THEIR
INTEGRATION SPOKESMAN AND SETS
THE TONE FOR THE COUNTRY'S
IMMIGRATION POLICY.
>> IN THE PAST, WE HAVE TAKEN A
LOT OF REFUGEES IN DENRK.MA
AND WE'VE COME TO A POINT WHERE
WE HAVE TO SAY ENOUGH IS ENOUGH.
WE CAN'T TAKE ANY MORE.
WE CAN'T HANDLE THIS TYPE OF
IMMIGRATION.
IT'S TOO HEAVY A BURDEN ON A
SMALL COUNTRY LIKE DENMARK.
SO LET'S JUST STEP ON THE BRAKE.
>> Reporter: AS THE NEW LAW WAS
BEING PASSED IN PARLIAMENT,
2,000 PEOPLE PROTESTED IN A
COPENHAGEN SQUARE.
OPPONENTS WARN THE CUTS WILL
INFLICT POVERTY ON NEWCOMERS TO
ONE OF THE WORLD MO'SST
EXPENSIVE SOCIETIES.
>> I'M ACTUALLY RATHER ASHAMED
ABOUT IT.
BECAUSE WE DIDN'T USED TO BE
LIKE THAT.
THERE ARE LOTS OF PEOPLE WHO
DON'T AGREE WITH THE GOVERNMENT
APPROACH TO THE GLOBAL PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: AT THE REFUGEE
COUNCIL, SECRETARY GENERAL
ANDREAS KAMM DESPAIRS AT THE
LACK OF EUROPEAN SOLIDARITY AND
FEARS THE DANISH GOVERNMENT'S
STRATEGY WILL BE COPIED BY OTHER
COUNTRIES.
>> IT WILL MAYBE LEAD TO
DISCRIMINATION, TO
MARGINALIZATION, TO GHETTOS,
WHATEVER.
AND I'M AFRAID IT WON'T LEAD TO
A POSITIVE INTEGRATION WHERE
PEOPLE WILL GET WORK, ETC, ETC.
>> Reporter: BUT THE NEW
GOVERNMENT IS CONSIDERING
TIGHTENING CITIZENSHIP
QUALIFICATIONS AND MAKING IT
MORE DIFFICULT FOR REFUGEES TO
BRING THEIR FAMILIES TO DENMARK.
THREE SYRIANS ARE ON HUNGER
STRIKE IN PROTEST AGAINST THE
FAMILY REUNIFICATION PROCESS.
AMONG THEM, 13-YEAR-OLD OSAMA
BILAL, WHO LEFT THE YARMOUK
PALESTINIAN REFUGEE CAMP IN
DAMASCUS WITH HIS UNCLE AFTER
HIS PARENTS WERE KILLED BY
BOMBS, THAT ALSO INJURED THREE
OF HIS EIGHT SIBLINGS.
OSAMA SAYS HE HAS BEEN TRYING
FOR A YEAR TO GET ASYLUM FOR THE
OTHER ORPHANS IN HIS FAMILY.
THE IMMIGRATION SERVICE SAYS IT
CAN'T COMMENT ON INDIVIDUAL
CASES, BUT ACKNOWLEDGES THERE
HAVE BEEN SOME DELAYS OVER THE
PAST YEAR BECAUSE OF
APPLICATIONS HAVE INCREASED.
>> ( translated ): IF I C
BRING MY BROTHERS AND SISTERS
HERE THEN I'LL GO BACK TO SYRIA.
I WILL NOT STAY HERE WITHOUT
THEM.
A LIFE HERE WITHOUT MY BROTHERS
AND SISTERS IS NOT A LIFE WORTH
LIVING..
>> Reporter: IF ANYWHERE
SYMBOLIZES EUROPE'S DEEP
DIVISIONS OVER THE
REFUGEE/MIGRANT CRISIS,
IT'S THIS BRIDGE WHICH LINKS
DENMARK TO SWEDEN.
THE TWO COUNTRIES ARE
DIAMETRICALLY.
THE DANES BELIEVE THE SWEDE'S
OPEN DOOR POLICY IS HOPELESSLY
NAIVE.
THE SWEDISHOVER GNMENT DECLINES
TO PUBLICLY CRITICIZE DENMARK.
BUT IT'S QUITE CLEAR THAT IN
STOCKHOLM, THEY BELIEVE THEIR
SOUTHERN NEIGHBOR IS BEING
DISTINCTLY UNCHARITABLE.
SWEDEN'S CENTER LEFT JUSTICE
MINISTER, MORGAN JOHANSSON, IS
PREPARED TO ACCEPT 100,000
SYRIAN REFUGEES THIS YEAR,
WHICH EQUATES TO A 1% INCREASE
IN THE POPULATION.
>> WE HAVE ACTUALLY SAVED
100,000 LIVES AND I MUST SAY I'M
VERY PROUD OF THAT.
WE CAN DO THIS.
BUT ONLY IF WE SHARE THE
RESPONSIBILITY WITHIN SWEDEN, OF
COURSE, BUT ALSO WITHIN EUROPE.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE PROBLEMS,
I WOULD SAY, IN THE LONG RUN.
WE CANNOT HAVE THE SITUATION
WITH SWEDEN AND GERMANY TAKES
HALF OF THE RESPONSIBILITY.
ALL COUNTRIES HAVE TO DO THEIR
FAIR SHARE.
>> Reporter: BUT SUCH TALK
INFURIATES COUNTRY AND WESTERN
LOVING SUPPORTERS OF THE RIGHT
WING SWEDEN DEMOCRAT PARTY.
THEY FEEL EXCLUDED FROM THE
IMMIGRATION DEBATE, LOOK TO
DENMARK FOR POLITICAL
INSPIRATION, AND
ACCORDING TO ONE OPINION POLL,
ARE NOW THE MOST POPULAR SINGLE
PARTY IN SWEDEN.
>> I'M VERY ANGRY BECAUSE YOU
FEEL POWERLESS, FRUSTRATION.
AND I THINK IT'S TIME PEOPLE
WAKE UP.
>> IT'S TOO MANYEOPL PE WHO COME
TO SWEDEN.
AND THEY HAVE NO PLACE TO LIVE.
THEY HAVE PLANOCE TO WORK.
AND THAT'S THE BIG PROBLEM IN
SWEDEN RIGHT NOW.
>> SOCIETY WILL BREAK UP.
WE WILL NOT HAVE COHESION
BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT GROUPS IN
THIS SOCIETY.
SO THERE WILL BE A SPLIT IN
SOCIETY WHICH CAN TURN OUT TO
TERRIBLE POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES.
>> IN THIS COUNTRY, YOU ONLY
NEED TO SAY "I SUPPORT THE
SWEDEN DEMOCRATS."
EVERYBODY SAYS YOU'RE A RACIST,
YOU SUPPORT HITLER AND
EVERYTHING.
YOU LIKE THE HOLOCAUST.
JUST BECAUSE YOU SUPPORT THE
SWEDEN DEMOCRATS.
AND THAT'S WRONG.
IT'S A VERY BIG DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN NAZIS AND PATRIOTISM.
>> Reporter: PARTY LEADER JIMMIE
AKESSON IS A DIVISIVE FIGURE IN
SWEDISH POLITICS AND REQUIRES
STRICT SECURITY BECAUSE OF HIS
OUTSPOKEN VIEWS ON IMMIGRATION.
>> ( translated ): THE
GOVERNMENT IS RAISING TAXES BY
SEVEN BILLION DOLLARS.
SEVEN BILLION.
DENMARK, WHICH IS JUST A FEW
HOURS FROM HERE IN THAT
DIRECTION, HAS FAR MORE REALITY-
BASED POLITICS.
IN DENMARK THEY HAVE A
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT, MEANING
LOWER, LEVEL OF IMMIGRATION.
AND IN DENMARK THEY ARE NOW
CHOOSING TO LOWER BENEFITS FOR
NON-CITIZENS.
IN DENMARK THEY ARE SUCCEEDING
WITH WHAT IT IS CLAIMED IS
IMPOSSIBLE TO DO IN SWEDEN.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE ARE MORE
EXTREME FORCES AT WORK ACROSS
SCANDINAVIA.
THESE SWEDISH RIGHT WINGERS
MARCHED ON A REFUGEE CENTER
AFTER A REJECTED ERITREAN ASYLUM
SEEKER WAS ACCUSED OF STABBING
TWOWEDE SS TO DEATH IN AN IKEA
FURNITURE STORE.
>> Reporter: AND IN WESTERN
DENMARK LATE LAST MONTH, AN
ASYLUM SEEKER TOOK THIS VIDEO OF
IN THE CAR PARK OF HIS
HOSTEL AS IT WAS VANDALIZED AND
ATTACKED.
GROWING RELUCTANCE OF REFUGEES
TO HEAD TO DENMARK MEANS THIS
RECEPTION CENTER WILL CLOSE
SOON.
BUT NEW ARRIVAL MOHEDDIN
HAJAZIEH IS RELIEVED TO BE HERE.
HE LE SYRIA TO ESCAPE BEING
CONSCRIPTED INTO PRESIDENT
ASSAD'S ARMY AND DREAMS OF
OPENING A BARBER'S SHOP.
>> I WILL TRY TO RETURN WHAT
THIS COUNTRY GIVES ME.
IF THEY GIVE ME ID, OR
NATIONALITY OR ANYTHING, I WILL
TRY TO MAKE GOOD WITH THIS
COUNTRY.
IT'S MY NEW COUNTRY.
MAYBE I WILL BE A DENMARKI.
>> Reporter: AT THE PROTEST
RALLY, OTHER SYRIAN ASYLUM
SEEKERS DEMONSTRATED THEIR
GRATITUDE.
LIKE SWEDEN AND SOME OTHER
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, THEY WANT
DENMARK TO BE MORE HOSPITABLE TO
THOSE STILL IN DANGER,
BUT IT'S DOUBTFUL THERE'LL BE
ANY COMPROMISE IN THIS CORNER OF
SCANDINAVIA.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M
MALCOLM BRABANT IN COPENHAGEN.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL GET ANALYSIS
OF THE EUROPEAN MIGRANT CRISIS
FROM SHIELDS AND GERSON IN A
MOMENT.
BUT FIRST, A LOOK AT THE LATEST
POLITICAL DIVIDES HERE AT HOME.
IT'S THE ISSUE THAT'S LOOMED
OVER HILLARY CLINTON'SAMPA CIGN:
HER USE OF A PRIVATE E-MAIL
SYSTEM AS SECRETARY OF STATE.
AND TODAY, IT DOMINATED HER
INTERVIEW WITH NBC'S ANDREA
MITCHELL.
>> MY PERSONAL EMAIL USE WAS
FULLY ABOVE BOARD.
IT WAS ALLOWED BY THE STATE
DEPARTMENT, AS THEY HAVE
CONFIRMED.
BUT IN RETROSPECT IT CERTAINLY
WOULD HAVE BEEN BETTER, I TAKE
RESPONSIBILITY, I SHOULD HAVE
HAD TWO ACCOUNTS, ONE FOR
PERSONAL AND ONE FOR WORK
RELATED.
>> Woodruff: STILL, CLINTON SAID
SHE DOES NOT BELIEVE THE
CONTROVERSY WILL COST HER THE
NOMINATION.
SHE DECLINED TO COMMENT ON
WHETHER VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN
WILL ENTER THE DEMOCRATIC RACE,
SAYING PEOPLE SHOULD GIVE HIM
THE SPACE HE NEEDS TO MAKE "A
DIFFICULT CHOICE".
HE WAS ASKED ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY LAST NIGHT, AFTER A
SPEECH AT A SYNAGOGUE IN
ATLANTA.
>> THE MOST RELEVANT FACTOR IN
MY DECISION IS WHETHER MY FAMILY
AND I HAVE THE EMOTIONAL ENERGY
TO RUN.
THE FACTOR IS, CAN I DO IT?
CAN MY FAMILY UNDERTAKE WHAT IS
AN ARDUOUS COMMITMENT THAT WOULD
BE PROUD TO UNDERTAKE UNDER
ORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES?
BUT THE HONEST TO GOD ANSWER IS
I JUST DON'T KNOW.
>> Woodruff: AND ON THE
REPUBLICAN SIDE, DONALD TRUMP
STRUGGLED THURSDAY WITH
QUESTIONS FROM RADIO HOST HUGH
HEWITT ABOUT THE LEADERS OF
TERROR GROUPS.
>> NOW I DON'T BELIEVE IN GOTCHA
QUESTIONS.
AND I'M NOT TRYING TO QUIZ YOU
ON WHO THE WORST GUY IN THE
WORLD IS.
>> WELL, THAT IS A GOTCHA
QUESTION, THOUGH.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU'RE
ASKING ME ABOUT WHO'S RUNNING
THIS, THIS, THIS, THAT'S NOT,
THAT IS NOT, I WILL BE SO GOOD
AT THE MILITARY, YOUR HEAD WILL
SPIN.
BUT OBVIOUSLY, I'M NOT MEETING
THESE PEOPLE.
I'M NOT SEEING THESE PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: ON A FFERDIENT
SUBJECT, TRUMP REPEATED TODAY
HE'LL SEEK TO RE-NEGOTIATE, BUT
NOT REPUDIATE THE IRAN NUCLEAR
DEAL.
THAT'S THE CUE TO TURN TO THE
ANALYSIS OF SHIELDS AND GERSON.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "WASHINGTON POST"
COLUMNIST MICHAEL GERSON.
DAVID BROOKS IS AWAY.
WELCOME, GENTLEMEN.
SO WE'VE JUST BEEN LISTENING TO
A LITTLE BIT OF POLITICS TO THE
WEEK.
HILLARY CLINTON, AN IMPORTANT
INTERVIEW TODAY.
A LOT OF QUESTIONS ABOUT AT THE
MAIL SERVER.
SHE SAID SHE WISHED SHE HAD DONE
IT DIFFERENTLY.
SHE SAID IT WASN'T THEEST B
DECISION.
WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THAT?
I MEAN, HAS SHE PUT THIS BEHIND
HER IN ANY SIGNIFICANT WAY, THIS
ISSUE?
>> NO.
I MEAN, SHE WAS APOLOGETIC, SHE
WAS CONTRITE.
I THINK IT'S FAIR TO SAY.
IT'S AN INTERVIEW WITH ANDREA
MITCHELL WHO IS NOT ONLY A
RESPECTED JOURNALIST BUT WHO HAS
COVERED MRS. CLINTNAN WASHINGTON
VERY WELL FOR A QUARTER A
CENTURY, SO THERE WEREN'T GOING
TO BE ANY SCREW BALLS ON THE
INTERVIEW'S WAY.
I THINK IT'S IN THE F.B.I.'S
HANDS, NOW, AND WE'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO HAVE THE E-MAILS
RELEASED A MONTH AT A TIME.
THIS STORY IS STILL WITH US AND
WILL REMAIN WITH US AND IT WILL
BE PART OF THE RUNUP TO IOWA.
THE ONE QUESTION THAT STRIKES MS
AS I LISTEN TO IT TODAY IS EVERY
PRESIDENT HAS THAT ONE PERSON
WHO CAN SAY, NO, STOP, YOU'RE
MAKING A FOOL OF YOURSELF AND
DOING THE WRONG THING.
THE COUNSELOR TO EISENHOWER AND
FORD AND NIXON SAID, EVERYBODY,
I DON'T CARE HOW POWERFUL, THE
CHAIRMAN, C.E.O., PRESIDENT,
WHEN THEY WALK INTO THE OFFICE
THEY'RE READY TO TELL THEM.
SHE NEEDS SOMEONE TO SAY NO, YOU
CAN'T DO THIS.
THE QUESTION IS DOES SHE HAVE
SOMEONE NOW.
>> Woodruff: I HEARD HER BEING
ASKED IS THERE SOMEONE ON HER
STAFF TO SAY THIS WAS A BAD
IDEA?
SHE SAID SHE DIDN'T THINK WHEN
SHE DID THIS.
>> ONE OF TAPS SHE GAVE WITH US
OOPS.
SHE DIDN'T LIKELY THINK OF IT AT
THE TIME.
THAT'S HER ARGUMENT.
IT STRAINS PLAUSIBILITY FOR
PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN IN
GOVERNMENT THAT KNOW HOW MUCH
EMPHASIS IS PUT ON RECORDKEEPING
AND SECURE COMMUNICATIONS WHEN
YOU'RE AT HIGH LEVELS IN THE
EXECUTIVE BRANCH.
IT'S JUST A BIG DEAL.
YOU KNOW, THE FEDERAL ACTS THAT
RELATE TO RECORDS.
SO IT DOESN'T HAVE THE RING OF
TRUTH IN THAT CASE.
SHE'S ALSO WELL BEHIND THIS
STORY.
WE'VE FOUND THIS WEEK THAT THE
F.B.I. IS NOW INVESTIGATING
POSSIBLE SECURITY BREACHES, LIKE
THE RUSSIANS AND CHINESE WITH
HER ACCOUNT.
WE LEARNED SHE HAS AN AIDE
TAKING THE FIFTH AMENDMENT.
WE LEARNED THERE ARE AT LEAST
SIX E-MAILS THAT SHE SENT THAT
HAVE CLASSIFIED INFORMATION IN
THEM.
I MEAN, THESE ARE SERIOUS
THINGS, CUMULATIVE THINGS THAT
SHE HAS NOT PROVIDED A VERY GOOD
ANSWER ON.
>> Woodruff: BUT, MARK, AT THE
SAME TIME, HILLARY CLINTON, THE
PEOPLE AROUND HER HAVE BEEN
SAYING YOU'RE MAKING A MOUNTAIN
OUT OF A MO HILL, THERE WAS
NOTHING NEFARIOUS GOING ON HERE,
ANYTHING THAT WAS CLASSIFIED WAS
MADE CLASSIFIED LATER.
>> THAT IS THEIR DEFENSE AND
POSITION AND IT'S TOUGH TO ARGUE
WITH AND THE EXAMPLE IS HER
TRYING TO GIVE A SPEECH GIVEN BY
TONY BLAIR THE BRITISH PRIME
MINISTER PUBLICLY THAT COULD NOT
BE SENT BECAUSE IT WAS
CLASSIFIED GAVE YOU SOMEWHAT AN
INDICATION OF HOW OVERLY
CLASSIFYING THE INTELLIGENCE
AREA AGENCY IS.
I WILL SAY THIS ABILITY
SECRETARY CLINTON TODAY, HER
ANSWER TO ANDREA ON JOE BIDEN
WAS PITCH PERFECT.
I MEAN, IT WAS HUMAN, IT WAS
NATURAL, IT WAS VERY PERSONAL IN
THE BEST SENSE AND IT DID NOT
HAVE ANY POLITICAL ANGLE TO IT
THAT I COULD DETECT.
>> Woodruff: SHE ASKED HER, DO
YOU HAVE A COMMENT ABOUT THE
FACT THAT HE'S CONSIDERING
RUNNING, AND SHE SAID, IT'S NOT
FOR ME TO SAY.
AND SHE WENT ON TO SAY HE NEEDS
THE SPACE TO THINK ABOUT IT.
>> YES.
>> Woodruff: MICHAEL, WE RAN A
CLIP OF WHAT THE VICE PRESIDENT
SAID LAST NIGHT AT THE SPEECH IN
THE SYNAGOGUE IN ATLANTA.
DO YOU THINK HE GETS THE SENSE
HE'S LEANING AWAY?
HE CLEARLY DIDN'T SOUND LIKE HE
WAS THERE YET.
>> I GET THE SENSE YOU'RE SEEING
THE PROCESS IN PUBLIC EXACTLY
WHAT HE'S THINKING ABOUT THIS.
IT'S ONE OF HIS APPEALS IS THIS
TRANSPARENCY.
THIS IS A FAMILY THAT UNDERWENT
A TERRIBLE TRAUMA THREE MONTHS
AGO THAT, YOU KNOW, A TRAUMA
LIKE THAT CAN STRENGTHEN A
FAMILY, BUT IT ALSO CAN BE A
DIFFICULT TIME, AND APTLE
CAMPAIGN BRINGS MINUTE AND
MASSIVE SCRUTINY.
HE CANOME C IN HERE -- HE DOES
NOT FIT AN IDEOLOGICAL GAP, BUT
THERE IS AN ETHICAL GAP THAT HE
MIGHT FILL.
THE WORST THING THAT'S COME OUT
OF THE EMAIL SITUATION FOR
HILLARY CLINTON IS ONE OF THESE
POLLS RECENTLY ABOUT WHAT ARE
THE TOP THREE WORDS YOU CAN
THINK OF WHEN YOU THINK OF THE
CANDIDATE AND IT WAS LIAR,
DISHONEST, UNTRUSTWORTHY.
THOSE ARE SERIOUS ISSUES THAT
COME OUT OF THE EMAIL SITUATION.
>> Woodruff: AND SHE WAS ASKED
ABOUT THAT TODAY, AGAIN, MARK,
BY ANDREA MITCHELL AND SHE SAYS,
OUR CAMPAIGN GOES ON AND I'M NOT
WORRIED ABOUT THAT, AND WE FEEL
GOOD.
>> IT HASN'T BEEN A GREAT SIX
MONTHS SINCE HILLARY CLINTON
ENTERED THE RACE.
SHE STILL IS THE FRONTRUNNER AND
FAVORITE AND IS STILL OBVIOUSLY
QUITE FORMIDABLE.
ON JOE BIDEN, HIS GREATEST
VIRTUE MAY BE ALSO HIS
OCCASIONAL VICE AND THAT IS THAT
TOTAL LACK OF ARTIFICE AND I
THINK HE WAS BEING TOTALLY FRANK
WITH THAT AUDIENCE LAST NIGHT IN
ATLANTA AND I THINK HE'S SAYING,
JUDY, WITH THE POSSIBLE
EXCEPTION OF ASKING SOMEONE TO
BE A LIFE PARTNER, THE MOST
PERSONAL DECISION ANYBODY MAKES
IS THE DECISION TO RUN FOR
PRESIDENT.
IT IS A DIFFICULT, PAINFUL, AND
HE KNOWS FROM PERSONAL
EXPERIENCE IT CAN BE
HEARTBREAKING.
>> Woodruff: AND YOU'RE ASKING
YOUR FAMILY --
>> YOU'RE ASKING YOUR FAMILY, I
HAVE A WONDERFUL REPUTATION, DO
I WANT TO RISK IT ALL, ALL OF
THAT.
IT'S REALLY DIFFICULT.
>> Woodruff: LET'S TURN
QUICKLY TO THE OTHER PARTY.
DONALD TRUMP YESTERDAY DID WHAT
HE SAID EARLIER HE WASN'T GOING
TO DO.
HE MET WITH THE HEAD OF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY AND SAID HE
WOULD SIGN THE PLEDGE.
HE HELD IT UP FOR EVERYBODY TO
SEE AND SAID HE PLEDGES HE WILL
NOT RUN AS AN INDEPENDENT OR
THIRD-PARTY CANDIDATE IF HE DOES
NOT GET THE REPUBLICAN NO
NOMINATION.
>> WELL, I THINK THE IMAGE OF
THE HEAD OF THE RNC MAKING THE
PILGRIMAGE TO THE TRUMP TOWER IN
ORDER TO GET SOME ASSURANCES IS
EXACTLY WHAT HE WANTS.
HE LOOKS IN CONTROL.
THIS IS THE MAN WHO WROTE THE
ART OF THE DEAL.
HE HAS TAKEN THE R.N.C. TO THE
CLEANERS AND HAS DONE A GOOD
DEAL BECAUSE HE NOW HAS GOTTEN
WHAT HE WANTED AND THE PLEDGE HE
MADE IS LESS THAN USELESS.
HE CAN JUST COMMENT AND SAY THE
REPUBLICANS VIOLATED THEIR PART
OF THE DEAL, I WAS TREATED
UNFAIRLY, HE BUILDS HIS CASE.
THIS IS A MAN WHO HAS CHANGED
SOME OF HIS MOST FUNDAMENTAL
POLITICAL VIEWS OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS IN ORDER TO SHIFT.
THIS IS NOT GOING TO BE AN
OBSTACLE FOR HIS AMBITIONS.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU SAY
ABOUT THAT?
>> I COULDN'T SAY IT BETTER.
I THINK THE IDEA THAT THE
CHAIRMAN OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY
AND THE STATES REQUESTED THAT HE
TO THIS IN ORDER TO RUN IN THOSE
STATES, THEY'RE CHANGING THEIR
OWN RULES, THAT COMES TO HIM AND
BECOME ALMOST A PROP FOR DONALD
TRUMP TO DO HIS DECLARATION AND
TAKE SHOTS AT THE OTHER
CANDIDATES AND THE CHAIRMAN HAD
TO STAND THERE AND DO IT, TAKE
IT IN ALL THE TIME.
I JUST THINK THIS FUELS THE FIRE
OF MR. TRUMP'S LACK OF HUMILITY.
>> Woodruff: I GATHER PREVISM
WITH HIM BEFORE THE RACE.
DOES THIS CHANGE ANYTHING?
>> I THINK JEB BUSH AND OTHERS
ARE TAKING HIM ON.
THE QUESTION BECOMES WHAT
HAPPENS ON THE 16th OF
SEPTEMBER WHEN THEY HAVE THEIR
NEXT DEBATE?
YOU RECALL JUST FOUR YEARS AGO,
I'M SURE MICHAEL DOES, THE
GOVERNOR OF MINNESOTA WAS A VERY
FORMIDABLE CANDIDATE AND HE WENT
ON SUNDAY AND
TALKED ABOUT OBAMA-ROMNEY CARE,
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT BASED ON
MITT ROMNEY'S.
24 HOURS LATER WHEN ASKED ABOUT
IT, HE WOULDN'T SAY IT, ANT HIS
CAMPAIGN -- HE WOULDN'T REPEAT
WHAT HE SAID 24 HOURS EARLIER.
SO THIS IS THE TEST.
IT'S ONE THING TO SAY IT A
THOUSAND MILES AWAY.
WILL THEY SAY IT TO HIM.
>> AN INTERESTING TEST TO JEB
BUSH, WILL HE REPEAT THE
CRITICISM HE'S MAKING TO TRUMP'S
FACE?
THEY HAVE BEEN STUFF.
HE'S NOT A CONSISTENT
CONSERVATIVE BUT IS ALSO USING
RACIAL DOG WHISTLES.
WILL HE PRESS THE DEBATE IN THE
CASE?
THAT WILL BE FASCINATING.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO TURN
YOU TO THE TERRIBLE HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS WE'RE SEEING OVER THE
REFUGEES IN EUROPE.
WE'RE SEEING THE PICTURES THAT
TEAR AT YOUR HEART.
WE SHOWED AGAIN ON THE PROGRAM A
LITTLE 3-YEAR-OLD BOY, MARK, A
SYRIAN CHILD WHOSE PARENTS WERE
TRYING TO GET HIM OUT OF THERE
AND INTO EUROPE.
HOW DO WE THINK ABOUT WHERE
RESPONSIBILITY LIES IN ALL OF
THIS?
I MEAN, WHERE SHOULD WE BE
LOOKING?
I MEAN, THERE IS DISAGREEMENT WE
HEARD TONIGHT HUNGARY IS
PROVIDING BUSES, BUT A LOT OF
REFUGEES WANT TO GO TO GERMANY,
FRANCE.
WHO SHOULD BE STEPPING UP RIGHT
NOW?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I THINK
ANGELA MERKEL IS PROBABLY THE
EXEMPLAR THAT POINT.
GERMANY IS THE SLICE OF SLIGHTLY
SMALLER THAN MONTANA.
IF THEY TAKE 800,000, THAT'S THE
EQUIVALENT OF UNITED STATES
TAKING 3.2 MILLION REFUGEES.
YOU COULD SAY, YES, EUROPE IS
AGING.
THESE ARE YOUNG, VIBRANT,
HARD-WORKING PEOPLE, THESE
REFUGEES ARE OBVIOUSLY
OVERWHELMINGLY THAT.
THEY'RE YOUNG AND DEDICATED AND
ENERGETIC AND AMBITIOUS BUT, YOU
KNOW, JUDY, I AM SURPRISED IT
HAS NOT BECOME AN ISSUE IN THIS
CAMPAIGN.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU MEAN.
I MEAN, THESE ARE REFUGEES
FROM AFGHANISTAN, FROM SYRIA,
FROM LIBYA, NOT TOTALLY DIVORCED
FROM THE UNITED STATES POLICY
AND PRESENCE AND INVASION AND
MILITARY ACTIONS IN THE MIDDLE
EAST.
WHAT DO WE HAVE?
WE'VE TAKEN 1800 SYRIAN REFUGEES
OVER THE LAST FOUR YEARS IN THIS
COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: I HEARD TRUMP ASK
ABOUT IT AND HE SAID IT'S
SOMETHING THE U.S. MIGHT HAVE TO
CONSIDER DOING.
BUT, MICHAEL, WHERE DO WE LOOK
AT A TIME LIKE THIS?
>> WHEN YOU LOOK AT
RESPONSIBILITY, YOU HAVE TO LOOK
AT PRESIDENT ASSAD, WHO
DESTROYED HIS OWN COUNTRY OUT OF
HIS OWN ARROGANCE AND BRUTALITY,
AND THEN I.S.I.S., WHICH HAS,
YOU KNOW, TAKEN ROOT IN THE
RUINS.
BUT WE ALSO HAVE FOUR YEARS OF
AMERICAN POLICY THAT'S NOT BEEN
VERY ACTIVE WHEN IT COMES TO
SYRIA, AND WE HAD A NUMBER OF
AMERICAN OFFICIALS, INCLUDING
HILLARY CLINTON, DAVID PETRAEUS,
LEON PANETTA, JOHN KERRY, WHO
PROPOSED MORE STRENUOUS ACTION
TO STRENGTHEN PROXIES TO TRY TO
PUSH FOR A PEACE AGREEMENT AND
TO TRY TO UNDERMINE THE
CAPACITIES OF THE REGIME TO
PEFORMR MASS ATROCITIES, AND THE
ADVICE FROM THOSE PEOPLE WAS NOT
TAKEN AGAIN AND AGAIN, AND WE'RE
SEEING SOME OF THE RESULTS OF
RELATIVE INACTION, I THINK.
>> I WILL JUST SAY, WITHOUT
GETTING INTO AN ARGUMENT WITH
MICHAEL, IT'S 15 YEARS, NOW, OF
THE UNITED STATES POLICY THERE.
WE DID, IN FACT, TOPPLE THE MOST
FORMIDABLE ADVERSARY WE HAD IN
SADDAM HUSSEIN.
WE LEFT A SHIITE GOVERNMENT WHO
SHOWED NO RESPECT FOR RIGHTS OF
THE SUNNIS AND OUT OF THAT GREW
I.S.I.S., AND I.S.I.S. NOT
JUST -- DID NOT COME FROM THE
BOW OF ANY GREEK GOD.
THIS IS A DIRECT CONSEQUENCE.
I THINK THAT THERE IS NO WILL IN
THIS COUNTRY, RIGHT NOW, FOR
MILITARY INTERVENTION.
I THINK THAT HAS BEEN KILLED.
I CAN LISTEN TO DICK CHENEY AND
READ HIS BOOK FROM NOW TILL THE
COWS COME HOME, BUT THERE IS NOT
EVEN A THIRD OF THE CONGRESS WHO
WOULD VOTE TO SEND IN MILITARY
ACTION AND DO LIMITED
ACCOMPLISHMENTS WITH AIR
STRIKES.
>> Woodruff: THE DEBATE GOES
ON AND I'LL GUARANTEE WE'LL HEAR
MORE ABOUT IT AS THIS CAMPAIGN
CONTINUES.
MARK SHIELDS, MICHAEL GERSON,
THANK YOU BOTH AND HAVE A GOOD
LABOR DAY WEEKEND.
>> Woodruff: NOW, ANOTHER NEW
ADDITION TO THE NEWSHOUR
BOOKSHELF.
TONIGHT'S FOCUS IS THE BRAVE NEW
WORLD OF ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT.
>> Brown: IS IT MAN AGAINST OR
WITH MACHINES?
DO MACHINES HELP, HURT US?
ROBOTS ARE SEEPING INTO MORE AND
MORE OF OUR LIVES BURKS HOW MUCH
ARE THEIR VALUE AND IMPACT
UNDERSTOOD AND ACCOUNTED FOR?
SUCH QUESTIONS ARE PART PART OF
A NEW BOOK THAT LOOKS AT THE
LAST DECADES OF ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE AND ROBOTICS,
ENTITLED "MACHINES OF LOVING
GRACE."
AUTHOR JOHN MARKOFF IS A
LONG-TIME SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
REPORTER FOR THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
WELCOME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: "MACHINES OF LOVING
GRACE," SOUNDS GREAT, RIGHT?
A LITTLE BIT ORIGINAL, A LITTLE
HUMAN LOVE BUT MORE COMPLICATED.
>> RIGHT, AND I MIGHT HAVE PUT A
QUESTION MARK AFTER IT.
>> Brown: OKAY.
ECAUSE I THINK WE CAN GO
DOWN AND PROBABLY WILL GO DOWN
BOTH PATHS.
MY POINT IS IT'S A HUMAN CHOICE
AT THIS POINT.
THESE MACHINES ARE NOT EVOLVING
BY THEMSELVES.
THEY'RE HUME DESIGNERS.
>> Brown: YOU'RE MAKING A
DISTINCTION.
YOU'RE COMING UP AS A REPORTER
AND MAKING A DISTINCTION BETWEEN
MACHINES THAT ARE REPLACING
HUMANS AND THOSE THAT ARE SORT
OF HELPING US.
>> YES.
>> Brown: GIVE ME AN EXAMPLE
OF WHY THAT'S IMPORTANT.
>> GO BACK TO INTERACTIVE
COMPUTING AND I NOTICED THERE
WERE TWO LABS ON EITHER SIDE OF
STANFORD, ONE THOUGHT BY JOHN
MCCARTHYY, HE THOUGHT IN 1962 IT
WOULD TAKE A DECADE TO REPLACE
HUMANS.
ANOTHER MAN, DOUG ENGLE BART
INVENTED THE MOUSE AND HELPED
WITH THE WORLDWIDE WEB AND HE
WANTED TO BUILD COMPUTERS TO
AUGMENT.
THERE ARE TWO PHILOSOPHIES AND
THEY DON'T TALK TO EACH OTHER
AND THE IDEA IS TO SQUARE THE
CIRCLE, BRING THEM TOGETHER, AND
YOU.
>> Brown: AND YOU'RE THINKING
ABOUT THE ETHICS.
A LOT OF THINKING GOES INTO THE
MAKING OF THE PRODUCTS AND THE
MACHINES, NOT ENOUGH INTO WHAT
THEY'RE FOR.
>> WE'RE AT AN INTERESTING
JUNCTURE WHERE MACHINES ARE
STARTING TO DO AUTONOMOUS
THINGS.
CARS ARE STARTING TO DRIVE.
WE'RE REPLACING HUMANS IN
CERTAIN PLACES WITH SYSTEMS THAT
ARE ROBOTIC AND ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE, AND THE DESIGNERS
NEED TO MAKE ETHICAL DECISIONS
ABOUT WHAT THEY EMBUE THE
SOFTWARE AND ROBOTS WITH.
>> Brown: ARE THERE EXAMPLE
WHERE THERE IS INTERESTING
THINKING GOING ON ABOUT THIS,
EVEN AT THE LEVEL OF THE LAB OR
THE PRODUCT MAKING?
>> THERE IS A LIVELY DEBATE
AROUND SOMETHING AS SEEMINGLY
SIMPLE AS AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE.
WHEN YOU IMBEAU THE CARS ABOUT
DECISIONS ON WHERE TO GO, THEY
WILL RUN INTO SITUATION WHERE IS
THEY HAVE ETHICAL DECISIONS TO
MAKE.
>> Brown: TO HIT OR NOT HIT.
IT'S CALLED THE TROLLEY
PROBLEM, PHILOSOPHERS HAVE BEEN
DEBATING IT FOR YEARS YOU GO
THIS WAY AND RUN OVER FIVE
PEOPLE, THIS WAY AND RUN OVER
ONE PERSON.
I THINK IT'S A FALSE DICHOTOMY.
AS WE BECOME MORE DISTRACTED,
THE PROBLEM FOR THE ROBOTS IS AN
EASIER ONE BECAUSE THEY ALWAYS
ARE ON, THEY NEVER GET
DISTRACTED AND THE ROBOTS WILL
TALK TO EACH OTHER SO WE MIGHT
NOT HAVE A TROLLEY PROBLEM
BECAUSE THE ROBOT WILL KNOW IF
THERE'S ANOTHER ROBOT OR
PEDESTRIAN OR BICYCLE THERE.
>> Brown: THINKING ABOUT WHAT
ROBOTS CAN OR CANNOT DO, YOU
THINK ABOUT WHAT IT IS TO BE
HUMAN.
WHAT ELSE IT THAT ONLY HUMANS
CAN DO?
>> WELL, I HAVE BEEN ASKED THAT
QUESTION.
WHAT IS IT TO BE HUMAN?
AND I THINK THAT THE NATURE OF
HUMANITY IS FOUND BETWEEN THE
INTERACTION THAT YOU AND I HAVE
AND IT'S ACTUALLY SOMETHING THAT
MAKES ME SLIGHTLY HOPEFUL
BECAUSE, EVEN THOUGH WE'RE BEING
SURROUNDED WITH ALL THIS
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY, THERE IS
THE POSSIBILITY THAT INTERACTION
BETWEEN YOU AND I MIGHT ACTUALLY
BECOME MORE VALUABLE AND, YOU
KNOW, IT MIGHT WORK OUT THAT
WAY.
THAT WOULD BE GREAT.
>> Brown: WHAT WOULD BE A
BETTER APPROACH FOR DESIGNERS?
WHAT SORT OF QUESTIONS SHOULD BE
ASKED AS THEY'RE DESIGNING NEW
PRODUCTS?
>> INCREASINGLY, IT IS POSSIBLE
TO TAKE THE HUMAN OUT OF THE
EQUATION.
IF YOU'RE IN A PURELY CAPITALIST
SYSTEM AND IT'S JUST A QUESTION
OF COST, THEN WHY NOT?
HERE'S AN EXAMPLE.
THERE IS A WONDERFUL SMALL
STARTUP IN SAN FRANCISCO CALLED
MOMENTUM MACHINES THAT IS GOING
TO MAKE HAMBURGERS.
A LOT OF PEOPLE WORRY ABOUT THIS
BECAUSE NOT ONLY ARE THEY ON THE
VERGE OF AUTOMATING THE PEOPLE
WHO TAKE YOUR ORDER BUT THEY'RE
TALKING ABOUT TAKING THE FRY
COOK OUT IN THE BACK, TOO.
BUT HE'S NOT PLANNING ON DOING
IT THAT WAY.
HE'S GOING TO HAVE A HUMAN
CONCIERGE WHO WILL BE THERE TO
OVERSEE THE WHOLE PROCESS, EVEN
THOUGH YOU ORDER YOUR HAMBURGER
WITH A SMARTPHONE AND APPARENTLY
GET THE PERFECT HAMBURGER, HE
REALIZES THAT'S NOT A GREAT JOB,
BEING A CONCIERGE IN THAT
SITUATION, SO HE MADE A DEAL IN
THE PLANNING WHERE HE'LL OFFER
THE PEOPLE WHO WORK IN HIS
HAMBURGER STANDS THE ABILITY TO
GET AN EDUCATION AND DO
SOMETHING DIFFERENT AFTER TWO
YEARS.
THAT'S AN EXAMPLE OF RETHINKING
THE SITUATION.
YOU AND SRI HAD THE SAME JOB IN
OUR ENTIRE CAREER.
IN THE FUTURE PEOPLE WILL GO
THROUGH MANY JOBS AND WE HAVE TO
RETRAIN THEM.
>> Brown: ARE YOU ARGUING THIS
IS A FUNDAMENTALLY NEW
SITUATION?
>> WE ARE IN A NEW SITUATION
BECAUSE A.I. TECHNOLOGIES THAT
DIDN'T WORK IN THE PAST ARE
WORKING NOW.
MACHINES ARE LISTENING AND
SEEING.
BUT, AT THE SAME TIME, WHAT'S
REALLY INTEIN
ANXIETY WE FEEL NOW, YOU CAN'T
JUST TAKE A SNAPSHOT.
YOU HAVE TO REALIZE THAT THE
HUMAN POPULATION IS CHANGING
DRAMATICALLY.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN CHINA, THEY HAVE
A ONE-CHILD POLICY AND THE
CHINESE POPULATION IS AGING.
IT MIGHT BE THE CASE IN CHINA
THAT THE ROBOTS COME JUST IN
TIME WHH IICS A VERY
COUNTERINTUITIVE IDEA.
>> Brown: WHY JUST IN TIME?
ECAUSE THE WORKFORCE WILL
SHRINK AND YOU WILL NEED ROBOTS
AND AT THE SAME TIME YOU WILL
GET AGIC EFFECT OF THE
POPULATION AND MAYBE ELDER CARE
ROBOTS WILL COME IN TIME TO TAKE
CARE OF US.
>> Brown: JOHN MARKOFF,
"MACHINES OF LOVING GRACE."
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Woodruff: A POST SCRIPT, YOU
CAN SPEND SOME QUALITY TIME WITH
JEFF TOMORROW, WHEN HE HOSTS A
DAY-LONG LIVESTREAM REPORT FROM
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS'
NATIONAL BOOK FESTIVAL.
170 AUTHORS WILL BE IN
WASHINGTON.
TUNE IN FROM 12:00 TO 6:00
SATURDAY, FIND IT ON OUR HOME
PAGE, pbs.org/newshour.